[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: The day of
the in-office doctor's visit
is over for now.
So how do we navigate
when we can't
see our doctor face to face?
Dr. Donese Worden
is here to help
us co-create a new kind of
relationship between health
care professional and
patient, so we can co-create
a new medical model together.
Donese, welcome.
Wow, has your
industry been altered.
>>DONESE WORDEN:
Turned upside down.
I will say, for me, not
as much, because I've
been doing virtual
medicine for a while now.
People that can't be patients--
I can see them all
over the world.
They become clients so
that I can advise them.
And I've been doing this
telemedicine for a while now.
So for me, I was
already in place.
For most docs, not at all.
And some of them still aren't.
>>REGINA: Well, you say,
gosh, how can you do anything
if you can't see the doctor
and they can't check you out?
And the reality
is a lot of people
are highly stressed
out and suffer anxiety
when they go in for a
doctor's appointment.
People do not like going to the
doctor's office, by and large.
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: So now, that part,
at least, hasn't been removed.
But how does it work
between you and them?
What are some of the new
tools available to you
to do remote telemedicine?
This is going to be
here for a while, right?
>>WORDEN: It's going
to be here for a while.
In fact, we may switch
mostly into that.
>>REGINA: That's
what I'm wondering.
>>WORDEN: For the
good or the bad.
But 92% of the patients and
the people that have been using
telemedicine now during
this pandemic like it.
They say, I don't
have to travel.
It's less time.
I don't have to sit in
the doctor's office.
I don't get the
white coat syndrome.
And you can still
get a feel if you
have a physician that's
willing to talk with you
and listen to you online.
And as far as diagnosing,
yes, there's a few things.
I can't palpate.
I can't touch something,
but I can see most things.
Show me a mole.
We have technologies now
that can do remote EKGs.
I'll talk about some of those.
>>REGINA: Yeah, we're
going to talk about--
>>WORDEN: The apps.
>>REGINA: --that in a minute.
>>WORDEN: Yeah, on the
wearables that are amazing.
And we can do most things.
We really can.
And most of us are enjoying it.
>>REGINA: Well, if you're
talking about HMOs,
for example, you're
only getting what?
An average at Kaiser of seven
minutes with the doctor anyway.
>>WORDEN: At best.
>>REGINA: At best.
Is there any chance
that you might even
get slightly better
care on some level?
Or with HMOs, they would
just remain the same.
You get seven minutes online.
>>WORDEN: That's probably
going to stay the same.
And the problem
is you might see--
I'll have patients come,
Regina, and they've
seen 6 or 8 or 10
different specialists.
No one is talking
to anyone else.
This specialist--
your cardiologist
is not looking at your liver.
And they're not talking
to the rheumatologist.
No one connects it anymore.
So trying to find the doctor
that can spend the time
to connect those dots--
that's where medicine is going.
Is it going to be within
the insurance model?
Probably not for a while.
It's the cash-pay--
>>REGINA: It'll
be out of pocket.
>>WORDEN: --model.
It is out of pocket.
But in the long run, it
saves everyone money,
including the system.
Because you're really pulling
it together diagnostically
and looking at a
patient, not just
physically, but emotionally,
spiritually, mentally--
>>REGINA: And
that's what you do.
>>WORDEN: --and asking
these questions.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I mean, we have friends.
And I know of their--
where they've been in trouble.
And they've come to you.
And I know of their
experience, because you
look at them holistically.
They have nothing but praise
for the relationship that you've
developed with them.
Let's talk just for a minute.
I mean, I'm thinking, overhead.
What happens when the doctor's
offices close up shop?
Now, the bummer is people lose
jobs, those people that are--
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: --in the office.
But this is part of our new--
>>WORDEN: It is part of the--
>>REGINA: --future.
>>WORDEN: --new paradigm.
And a lot of primary cares have
already gone out of business.
And it looks like several--
many more are going to
by the time this is over.
They've had to let staff go.
The overhead is huge in
medical-- our malpractice,
our business insurance.
By the time you put
our expenses together,
we're not really making much.
And people think
that doctors do.
They really don't,
especially in primary care
or internal medicine.
So it's going to shave
off some of the overhead.
But like you said,
some jobs will be lost.
But we're in trouble.
We already have a shortage.
And it's going to get worse
on primary care physicians.
Now, we'll start looking
to nurses and others
to jump in for that
seven-minute visit.
And to me, that's even scarier
without the medical training.
>>REGINA: Do you think
that the industry of PAs
is going to become a bigger
deal-- physician's assistants?
Do you think that that's
going to become more in demand
with what's happening now?
>>WORDEN: It already is.
Nurse practitioners--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORDEN: --and PAs
are stepping in.
The doctors are allowing them
to do more and more and more.
Many of them are very good
at what they do, especially
within the box that you stay
in within traditional medicine.
Right?
And some of them sometimes
will listen a little bit more,
spend a little more time
than the doctors do.
However, their
amount of training
is far less than a physician.
>>REGINA: Right.
I know of one person,
in particular,
who chose to remain
a PA who's very
advanced in his
understanding of medicine.
So he works alongside a
doctor and trains the doctor
in his methods of holistic
healing of the person.
But the reason he
did it is because--
and we're going to
talk about this.
He was limited by what
he could offer as an MD.
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: And
that's why we think
this might become something
that people start thinking of.
And how do you feel about that?
Because you've done
your due diligence.
You're an MD.
You're a naturopath.
>>WORDEN: Yeah, as a
naturopathic medical doctor,
I sit in the middle.
And I'm able to
do both, which is
nice to be able to look at
the meds, either prescribe
or hopefully take them off.
It's very rare
that we want to go
there to prescribe and
to understand that.
That's a unique place to sit--
>>REGINA: It is.
>>WORDEN: --from a
physician's standpoint
and being able to
look at all sides
and present to a patient,
especially oncology patients
when they call and they
think they have a mindset.
I want to come in.
I only want to do
alternative medicine,
or I only want to
do traditional.
And it's about keeping
that open mind,
educating that
patient in all of it
so that they can really
make proper decisions.
>>REGINA: So do
you think that this
is where medicine
might be going,
more and more people
becoming naturopaths?
>>WORDEN: I think the
demand will be there.
Because the public
is at the point.
>>REGINA: Already moving
in that direction.
>>WORDEN: They're already
moving the direction.
And they're saying, what can the
doctor know in seven minutes?
He didn't ask me anything.
I mean, you go to a naturopath.
We're asking about your
spiritual belief system
and what your bowel
movements look like--
>>REGINA: Right, right.
>>WORDEN: --from one
end to the other.
And it is we want
to know everything.
>>REGINA: First
to seventh chakra.
>>WORDEN: That's exactly right.
So you want to know what-- all
like the old family doctor who
saw the whole family.
I have five generations in some
of my families that I look at.
I love that.
Do I need to do the
genetics in them?
Maybe, if I see something
going through that
we haven't identified.
But most of the time,
I know what's coming.
And so we prevent it.
And that's beautiful medicine.
>>REGINA: It really is.
So right now, that's not what
most people are experiencing.
>>WORDEN: No.
>>REGINA: Right now,
if you want to go
see your doctor because
something is wrong,
you have to go to an urgent
care facility, I guess.
I mean, if someone is feeling
sick, where do you even go?
>>WORDEN: Well, that emergency
medicine is emergency medicine.
We need to see it as such.
It is life saving, life
threatening in that moment.
Anything else-- all
they're going to do
is release you and say, go
back and see a specialist
or your primary care.
They're there to save your life.
They are not there for your
overall health and discovering
what the root of the problem is.
Unless it's a heart
attack, we want to know.
>>REGINA: No.
Right.
>>WORDEN: Then you want
them to take care of it.
>>REGINA: Sure.
>>WORDEN: Right?
But that is not what
that is built for.
And the system is overloaded.
It's broken.
And I think most of the
people, most in the public--
they know that.
>>REGINA: We're going
to talk about some
of the ways in which
it's broken in a moment.
And we're going to
spend some time talking
about what's happening in
the mental health sector.
Because this is tragic--
what's going on now.
A lot of people are depressed.
A lot of people had
underlying conditions
that have moved
beyond depression
into other kinds of behavior,
be it paranoid, aggressive,
and so forth.
We'll talk about that.
And I know that you
just finished reading
a very interesting book--
>>WORDEN: Yes.
>>REGINA: --on this subject
that's fueling your commitment
to this even further.
But what I want to do first--
let's get into some of the
toys, some of the tools--
>>WORDEN: The technologies--
>>REGINA: --that are now--
>>WORDEN: --that we've got.
>>REGINA: --available
so that if you've got
someone sitting across from
you with health problems
across the screen.
>>WORDEN: Right.
Exactly.
So we've got remote
ways of looking.
We can do radiology,
can send something off.
A radiologist in real time can
read a CAT scan or a PET scan.
I'll have to wait 10 days
to get a report, right?
For dermatology, 3D pictures.
They can look at it and say
that looks like melanoma.
That is suspicious
so that now, we
know we do need a visit with
that particular specialist.
So we've come very, very far,
just from the doctors' offices.
There's new
technology that looks
like you can wear a device,
and it will deliver medicines
to that melanoma.
Melanoma is very
painful to treat.
But with the new patches,
with the little needles
and the medicines, it can
be delivered without pain.
So we've got some
exciting technologies
that are on their way and things
that we already are using.
Right?
And the artificial intelligence
and what that's doing--
is that "scary" or "not scary?"
So for using it for the right
purposes, I really like it.
It can look at
pulmonary nodules.
It can look at a
radiology and see
if they're pulmonary nodules--
>>REGINA: Very interesting.
>>WORDEN: --and other
things, that it's actually
faster and smarter than doctors
are in reading some things.
So if we're using it
for the right purposes,
I'm not against it.
>>REGINA: What do
you think about D
in terms of our actual
functional levels of it,
as gaining it from the sun
versus supplementation?
>>WORDEN: Well, the sun
helps us convert, right?
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>WORDEN: That's the thing.
But if you don't have
those base molecules going,
it's hard for it to convert.
You need both.
>>REGINA: You've
got to have both.
>>WORDEN: And most people
are deficient in vitamin D
that we test.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORDEN: I think
it's environmental.
Something is blocking it.
>>REGINA: But what's going on?
>>WORDEN: Vitamin
D is a hormone.
>>REGINA: I know.
>>WORDEN: It's a hormone.
>>REGINA: But what's
going on, because--
>>WORDEN: We don't know.
>>REGINA: --it's an epidemic?
>>WORDEN: Yeah, we don't know.
>>REGINA: Everyone
I know, doesn't
matter how healthy, comes back
with insufficient vitamin D.
>>WORDEN: Arizona-- people
that are in the sun--
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>WORDEN: Golfers.
Vitamin D deficient.
That's not because they're
not getting enough sunshine.
>>REGINA: Sun.
Yeah.
>>WORDEN: Something
is blocking it,
and the science is
still not clear on that.
>>REGINA: Well, meanwhile,
it's a cheap supplement.
>>WORDEN: It is.
>>REGINA: So the good thing
is anybody can afford it.
In fact, the government
should be giving it out
through local
distribution centers.
>>WORDEN: And one of the--
>>REGINA: Because it's
at the base of so many--
>>WORDEN: So right.
>>REGINA: --diseases.
>>WORDEN: It is.
But vitamin D by itself can
be harmful in high doses.
Vitamin A, D, E, and K--
those are those lipid soluble we
got to be careful with, right?
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>WORDEN: They can
make you toxic.
But vitamin D with vitamin
K is their proper way
to usually do it.
But again, you need to
ask the doctor if you
have any cardiovascular issues.
But D and K together
are a better way
to do than just vitamin D.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
OK, this has been very helpful
for people watching right now.
>>WORDEN: Good.
>>REGINA: Donese, I want to
go into this other area a bit,
because this is something that
you're really impassioned by.
We're going to jump
around a little bit.
We're going to go to
mental health, OK?
And we were talking off camera.
You're just finishing
up this book.
And I'm going to try
to find the author--
"Mad in America."
>>WORDEN: Yes, I just
finished it yesterday,
as a matter of fact.
Now, I know what I see.
>>REGINA: Robert Whitaker.
>>WORDEN: Right.
Robert Whitaker.
It's older, but
it still applies.
100% still applies.
And he really got
bashed by this.
But what he did was
document the history
like Travis Christofferson
with the history of cancer.
>>REGINA: Of cancer.
>>WORDEN: Right-- "Tripping
Over the Truth" book.
>>REGINA: By the way, just
quick diversions here.
Whatever happened to Travis?
Is he OK after writing?
I did the interview with them.
I love his work.
>>WORDEN: He's great.
He's still doing
a lot of writing.
He wrote another book
on something different
about the medical system.
And he's doing a lot of writing.
>>REGINA: All right.
>>WORDEN: So Travis
is doing great.
>>REGINA: OK, good.
I'm glad to hear it.
I love the guy.
OK, so let's go ahead.
>>WORDEN: So this is what I
have known, what I have seen.
I personally believe that
most of psychiatry-- most
is pseudoscience.
And I've known it.
I've looked at the studies
myself and thought,
this is garbage, or this one's
decent, or this one is not
and what I have seen
it doing to patients.
And I've wanted to dig my
teeth in deeper than I have.
And I've dug in
quite a bit already.
But that book gave
me the history,
the horrible, torturous,
nauseating history
of what we have done with
mental illness in this country
and what we are still doing.
We really haven't
progressed much.
We're causing brain damage
now with medications
and not helping anybody
really with what
the pathology is, which we
really still don't understand.
We're talking about
schizophrenia, bipolar.
Most people in America-- the
stats were 8.1% of people
were anxious.
Anxiety is the number
one, more than depression.
More than anything
else, it's anxiety.
Now, the stats are 80%.
When physicians are
asking, 80% of people
are experiencing
some form of anxiety.
And the families
are experiencing it.
The kids are experiencing it.
And my message is,
please, please, learn
how to take care of that.
Work with someone
who can help you.
Don't think that you
can do it by yourself.
But don't be--
>>REGINA: How about Sensate?
>>WORDEN: --anxious.
Maybe.
I don't know.
>>REGINA: The Sensate app.
>>WORDEN: Maybe.
Try things.
Don't get into a
depression where
you're at a suicidal state.
You need help.
However, I would
caution everyone
to not just go and let's
take up the next pill,
the next pharmaceutical.
That might help your
anxiety for a moment.
But now, you may be addicted.
Now, you're going to go through
a cycle of sleep problems.
Now, depression.
You're going to gain weight.
It's going to castrate you
in a sense with-- sexually.
There are many horrible side
effects to these medications.
And you better read the insert.
And you better know about
them before you do them.
I'm not saying
don't treat, but I'm
saying be aware and
don't think, I'm anxious,
let me just start this for now.
You better understand
that once you start them,
it's a very hard
row to come off.
>>REGINA: So tell me, off the
top of your head, if you can,
the top three.
I'm going to try to get
an interview with him,
but the top three
takeaways from that book
that you were really--
maybe that even shocked you.
>>WORDEN: Right.
Well, I mean, I knew a
lot of the older practices
that were at the time
sanctioned by the AMA
and the large institutions,
our hospitals in.
But it was the Rockefeller
Institute, honestly,
that started--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORDEN: --saying
let's do pharmaceutical,
let's look at this.
And that's when things, in
my opinion, and in others
started going really awry.
>>REGINA: Well, this started
decades and decades ago.
>>WORDEN: Oh, yeah.
>>REGINA: It put us under even
people like Royal Raymond Rife.
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: Researchers
went down after that.
>>WORDEN: So we were
drowning people--
literally drowning and
bringing them back,
not just electroshock.
What about the
frontal lobotomies?
We did it forever, knowing
that it didn't work, that we
were doing brain damage.
Then they came out
with the medications.
And they figured out
how they were working.
Sure, it made them calm.
The staff was happy.
And their family
was happy, except--
>>REGINA: Lithium?
>>WORDEN: --the fact
that there was nothing.
Well, there's all
kinds of medications.
>>REGINA: But I mean, that
was a really common one.
>>WORDEN: It was a common
one for some people.
In very, very, very low
doses, it might be helpful.
But what happened was they
give more and more and more.
They literally damage the brain.
They've lost their
personalities.
They're drooling.
Yeah, they're not aggravating.
And they're not
yelling and screaming,
but they are literally a walking
vegetable with no personality.
>>REGINA: What about just
the common stuff today
where everybody does
the Prozac or whatnot?
>>WORDEN: They are not
without side effects.
That's the point.
And in time, I think
that we will look back
like we're looking
back now and say,
how could we have done that?
We wouldn't have done it
to prisoners in the jail.
But we were allowed
to do experiment
on mentally challenged people,
literal experiments hurting
them, severe pain, horrendous
trauma of creating fear
on purpose, of thinking that
we're going to shock them out
of a psychosis.
None of that worked.
And now, we're using drugs
to do the same thing.
It's not fixing anything.
There is no real brain
chemistry that we have super
identified-- the dopamine
pathway and all that.
That's been disproven.
But every psychiatrist
that I have talked with
are still stuck on that.
And that's why you've got to
take this medicine-- serotonin,
dopamine.
If you look at the science
and you look at the research,
it's not good.
That's the honest truth of it.
And we have new research
that's coming out
that you have to look at
who funded it, Regina--
>>REGINA: Oh, my gosh.
Yeah, I think I told you this.
>>WORDEN: --and
how it's designed.
You can take any study
and poke holes in it.
You can take it and design
it from the beginning
to try to look at what you
want to happen at the end.
And the pharmaceutical
companies are masters at this.
And especially in
psychiatry, which
is one of the biggest,
if not the biggest
amount of money that they make
are on these psychiatric--
>>REGINA: Hey, I watch--
>>WORDEN: --medications.
>>REGINA: --the
ads on television.
>>WORDEN: And so they can make
it look the way that they want.
But when you really look
at the research, when
you look at how it was
designed, who designed it,
what the outcome was
supposed to be or really is,
it becomes very gray and
very "squishy," so to speak.
>>REGINA: Indeed.
In fact, I may have mentioned
this on another show
with you at one time.
But one of the biggest
shocks of my young,
professional life as
a journalist was I had
a whistle-blower from inside
a university that does a lot
of medical research hand me--
it was just a spiral-bound
ledger of the research
going on within the university
and who funded each project.
I thought, there is--
what I came away with-- there's
virtually no pure research.
I was just shocked.
>>WORDEN: It's hard.
>>REGINA: And the
university came after me
when I reported it on the news.
And I only reported a sliver.
And they came after
the station, too.
They were going to
sue the station.
>>WORDEN: Sure, sure.
It's big business.
And to come out and especially
as a physician, a journalist,
you have freedom of speech
that can protect you, somewhat.
>>REGINA: Not on a
television station.
They'll come after everybody.
>>WORDEN: Well, that's true.
They come after everybody.
But as a physician to
come out and officially
challenge and call
it pseudo-science,
you've got to have a hard shell
and ready to take the backlash.
Because the only groups
that really can fund really
well-done research are
the pharmaceuticals.
But if you say, well, what
about the universities?
What about the NIH?
Well, guess what?
>>REGINA: They're supported
by the pharmaceuticals.
>>WORDEN: It's very
difficult to find an--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>WORDEN: --academic
psychiatrist that is not
on a board--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>WORDEN: --or supported by
a pharmaceutical company.
It's just embedded.
>>REGINA: So we are so screwed.
Now, in which countries of
the world that you're aware of
is it pure?
Is there a purer science in
the developed Western countries
anywhere?
>>WORDEN: I think that I'm
not going to say science.
I'm going to say, let's
look at the outcomes.
If we look at
schizophrenia, for example,
the third world countries that
don't medicate their patients
have far better results.
They have less people having
their second psychotic breaks.
They let them go through it.
They support them.
They nurture them.
We did that in this country
for a while in a couple
of-- the Quakers did it--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORDEN: --and a couple.
And their stats to date are
still far better than ours are.
What do we do?
Somebody does something
uncomfortable.
And we go-- oh, we throw
them in the psych ward.
Let's medicate them.
Let's damage their brain.
Let's get them on this cycle.
And we'll just watch them go
in and out, and in and out,
and in and out.
>>REGINA: OK, let's
start right there.
So in the Quaker
society, for example,
do they keep the people at home
with them and not isolate them?
>>WORDEN: Well, they
had their own little--
I won't call them hospitals.
They were centers
that were run, that
were social support,
good food, good water
and let people talk--
>>REGINA: Company.
>>WORDEN: --let them go
through this psychosis
and talk and say, I think
that I am speaking to aliens
at the moment, whatever it was.
>>REGINA: Well, first of all,
that's pretty common in here.
>>WORDEN: I know in this group.
I know everybody could
say, of course they were.
But whatever their
delusion could have been,
nobody judged them.
Nobody tried to medicate
them, knock it out of them
into this drooling mess, right?
And they got better.
Their rates of
relapse were far lower
and still are today,
compared to today.
We had a house.
It was a group of doctors.
And I got it in my
notes somewhere here.
But it is in that book
as well, that it was--
and I was well aware of this.
And it was run by physicians.
But again, it was very few.
If any medications
were ever used,
they let the body process.
Let the mind process through
this and learn how to do it.
So let's learn how to deal.
Let's learn how
to be more in tune
with ourselves, with our mental
health, our spirituality,
and our families.
This could be a good thing.
>>REGINA: Well, that's--
>>WORDEN: It's challenging us.
>>REGINA: --the silver lining.
I see that as a silver lining.
Families are coming back
together out of necessity.
Now, families, as
this progresses
and the financial
repercussions progress,
more families will be living
together multi-generationally.
>>WORDEN: Yes.
Yes.
>>REGINA: And I have seen
this coming for years
and have looked at it as a
total blessing where we all
have one another.
Take some of the burden off.
>>WORDEN: Yes.
>>REGINA: Not one person--
>>WORDEN: Multi-dimensional.
>>REGINA: --has to be
going to the office,
working 40 to 60 hours a
week, coming home, paying
all of their bills, doing their
shopping, doing the cooking.
And if you're a single
mother or a single father,
taking care of the kids, too.
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: I think it's a
beautiful opportunity for us
to come together and help.
>>WORDEN: And I do, too, Regina.
But most people
don't like change.
>>REGINA: And that might help.
>>WORDEN: And this change
happened that quick.
>>REGINA: I get that.
But in the end,
that might help it.
>>WORDEN: Wake up.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>REGINA: Wake up.
And it might help
with that extreme--
>>WORDEN: Yes.
>>REGINA: --anxiety
and depression that--
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: --so many
people are going through,
especially if their
job is at risk--
>>WORDEN: That's exactly right.
>>REGINA: --right now.
>>REGINA: Because that is
going to drive you buggy.
I mean, it's going to cause
some severe depression--
>>WORDEN: Some anxiety, and--
>>REGINA: --in some people.
>>WORDEN: --depression,
and all that.
But again, what is
important in your life?
And what can you do
about it in this moment?
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>WORDEN: Learning
to prioritize.
And it's usually
about your health
and your family's health.
That should be your priority.
Because without
that, you can't--
>>REGINA: So, someone comes.
They're severely depressed.
They're picking up weight.
Maybe they've been even
involved in domestic violence,
which is way on the increase--
>>WORDEN: Yes, that's right.
>>REGINA: --kids,
women, so forth.
Not good.
Divorce-- apparently,
can't even get on--
>>WORDEN: You're spending time--
>>REGINA: --the docket.
>>WORDEN: --with
that person now.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: Well, I mean--
>>WORDEN: Yeah, don't
like them after all.
>>REGINA: --there
are so many divorces
that I know that in
certain counties,
the system is so clogged,
you can't even get a divorce,
if you want to, for a while.
You have to get on the
docket and wait your turn.
And so this is really--
it's forcing everyone to deal
with their stuff, how really--
>>WORDEN: To really look--
>>REGINA: --it's
going to come up.
>>WORDEN: --at your life.
>>REGINA: So when you have
someone sitting in front
of you, they're depressed.
They've picked up some weight.
Now, they're more depressed.
And now, say,
they're on the verge
of maybe losing their income.
How do you, in your position--
I mean, they haven't
gone to their--
whoever their guru,
whatever it is.
They've come to you.
How do you guide them?
Where do you start?
>>WORDEN: If they're
new to me, they're
going to take that one and
half, two-hour time to fill out
that form that tells me
everything that I need to know.
And then we will dig in.
My job is to prioritize.
What does that person
sitting in front of me
need at this moment?
What are the basic
changes that they
can do that doesn't
cost a lot of money?
Or if they have
expendable income,
what are some unique tests?
And maybe-- I know
we talked about that.
We might bring some of that--
>>REGINA: We're
going to bring those.
>>WORDEN: --today.
Yeah-- is, how far
can we and do we
need to go to get
that person better?
But sometimes, Regina,
it's just somebody
knowing that they're
being listened to,
that they're being heard
by someone that they trust
that knows medical,
that they can talk
to about their spirituality.
The patients that
come from Gaia--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORDEN: --they've seen
my interview with you,
the oncology patients.
My staff even goes, yay,
it's a Gaia patient calling.
Because I don't have
to try to talk to them
or inch in to the importance
of spirituality and meditation,
prayer, spending that time.
They already know
that importance.
So we get to speak
at a different level
while I'm digging into--
>>REGINA: The
underlying conditions.
>>WORDEN: --the
underlying conditions
in the physical body, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>WORDEN: But we can speak
in a different language.
And they are just so--
I have two in a couple of days--
stage IV terminal cancers.
And they are just hopeful.
They have been through
both of them-- traditional.
Well, I take that back.
One has been
through traditional.
The other one hasn't even
seen an oncologist yet.
They want to talk
to me first, right?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>WORDEN: But it
is their mindset.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORDEN: It's the
mindset of preparing.
>>REGINA: And you had
a client, as I recall.
I think she was also a
naturopathic doctor, right?
And she came to you.
And she had very clear beliefs.
I am not doing this.
I'm not doing this.
But she was relying
on you to guide her.
And you had an interesting
outcome with her.
>>WORDEN: With that
one was breast cancer.
Yes.
And she said, I will never do
anything that's traditional.
And then she asked for my help.
I said, I need to know more.
Give me some more diagnostics.
Do something so that I can
help guide you through this--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>WORDEN: --if you
made up your mind.
But please don't think
that you're stuck.
Please be open.
When we find out
new information,
it opens up new possibilities.
She was adamant.
Well, we did a little
bit more testing.
When she found out she's triple
negative and HER2 positive
and all that, she had surgery.
And I was in support of it.
Because for her, she
knew what that meant.
I have other patients
that come in.
And they don't have a clue.
They don't want to have a clue.
I have one right now--
ovarian cancer five years out.
She should have been
gone four years ago.
She still, to this date,
doesn't know or want to know.
But by the stats,
she should've been--
>>REGINA: She should be dead.
>>WORDEN: --gone.
And I think that's
in her benefit.
It's you as a person.
Do you find comfort in knowing
all the science, the research?
If you do, I'm going
to give it to you.
And I'm going to tell you.
I'm going to help you
know what's good research.
And we'll go.
We'll dig down, so you feel
comfortable about your choices.
Or are you the person that
says, I don't want to know.
I want to pick the
people that I trust
and let you make my decisions.
You have to know yourself.
And as a physician,
we have to know
who's sitting in front of us.
If I had told that
patient her statistics,
my belief system is she probably
would have already been gone.
She doesn't have a clue.
>>REGINA: It's amazing what the
mind will conjure both ways.
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: I mean,
the mind is amazing.
The being is amazing.
>>WORDEN: It's be open.
We don't have to choose, Regina.
And that's the point.
It's diversity.
I don't have to choose
alternative medicine
or traditional.
Why aren't you open to both?
Let's look at the
best and the worst.
But let's look at the best of
both and your belief system.
Now, let's choose
the course that
needs to go through with it.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
Now, let's talk about
some of the tests
we were going to get to.
So now, if you're doing virtual
medicine and you have a doctor
somewhere, you can ask
for tests, first of all.
You can request tests.
>>WORDEN: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And so let's
talk about the top test
to request for the average Joe,
right now, or Jolene, whatever.
[LAUGHTER]
>>WORDEN: I think things that
are missed all the time--
hemoglobin A1C.
That's a three-month
look at your blood sugar.
You may go in one day.
And your glucose
looks OK on that test,
but it may be high on my book.
But your traditional doctor
may not even mention it to you.
But if you look at
three months, it
tells you your risk
factor for diabetes.
Now, it's time to
say, you better
start looking at what
you're eating, not eating.
Let's make some dietary changes.
Some of my patients-- it depends
on what they're coming in for.
It depends on their
family history.
But I will get basic
cancer markers--
CA-125/CEA.
And I tell my patients,
I do not think
or have a reason to believe that
you have cancer at this moment.
However, if I have
this right now
and if you have a lump or a bump
show up a few years from now,
instead of being told, well,
let's just watch it, wait,
and see, I'm going to say no.
Let's rerun these numbers.
If these numbers have
jumped up quickly,
we're not going to wait.
We're going to look and see
because things caught early
or much easier than later.
High-sensitivity
C-reactor protein--
CRP.
That's how much inflammation
you have in your body.
And, Regina, you know almost
every chronic degenerative
disease we have--
you name it.
It's based on inflammation.
Why are we not knowing
that in our patients?
And if they're full of
inflammation, don't--
going on to an anti-inflammatory
medication that
has negative side
effects, but looking
at what you're eating, what
you should not be eating,
looking at the
diet and lifestyle.
And can we do things to
bring down that inflammation?
Those are important.
And then there's specialty
tests that are interesting.
We can look at your levels of
your vitamins, your minerals,
your proteins in the
white blood cell.
Remember, that
your immune system.
We can run those tests and look.
Are you actually
deficient in a nutrient.
Instead of saying, here's a
bag of supplements, take it,
and I hope you'll get
better-- bad medicine.
It's nice medicine in thought,
but it's not good medicine.
We can do genetics.
I have a new test
now that I've been
using called MicroGen.
Regina, if you have
an infection-- and a lot
of times, it's just there
and low level and making
your immune system busy.
It's missed because we
usually send out something.
And when the lab finds one
pathology, let's say E. coli,
they quit looking.
And there could
be co-infections.
So now, I'm doing
these different types
of testing where they
test it multiple ways.
And I'll have patients come
back with six pathogens.
And it allows me to know
the best treatments.
One treatment might get
to five or six of those,
so it's precision medicine
and not missing things.
And we've got that.
We have the DUTCH hormone test.
It's not just looking at
your levels of hormones.
Looking at the pathways--
that's where the problems begin.
There are certain
pathways we want to block,
certain pathways
we want to open up.
We may not have to use hormones
to get somebody feeling better.
It's looking at these
precision, precise pathways.
And that's exciting to me.
>>REGINA: That
part of medicine--
>>WORDEN: I love that.
>>REGINA: --is cool.
>>WORDEN: It is.
>>REGINA: That these things are
there where you can get that
deeper glimpse into your--
>>WORDEN: That's right.
That's right.
>>REGINA: --your own
internal chemistry.
>>WORDEN: And we can look
into your microbiome.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And that's where I
wanted to go next.
Because this is
the big one, right?
>>WORDEN: Yeah, yeah.
So the microbiome testing--
we can see, let's say, your
cloud, your amount of bugs.
We can see if you're high in
Bifidos or if you're-- we can
look at your little cloud.
What we know now by the science
is, I can't take my cloud,
do anything to change it
to make it look like yours.
We can switch ours
around a little bit.
And "diet is the golden thing"
if we can make changes in diet.
And it's about diversity.
We know the more bugs that we
have, the healthier we are.
We also know that it's pretty
much set-- your fingerprint
in childhood.
How you're born, if you
were a vaginal birth,
if you were breastfed,
if you have siblings.
And one of the
biggest things that
helps have more
diversity for children
and to create our microbiome for
the rest of our life are pets.
They're a good thing.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Yeah.
>>WORDEN: Isn't
that interesting?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>WORDEN: So in adults,
what changes ours is
recent medication, geography.
PPIs, the proton
pump inhibitors--
those are horrible on
our microbiome, right?
They change our individual
microbiome in a negative way.
But we can't go and say, OK,
let me make mine match yours.
That doesn't exist yet.
Precision medicine,
one day, is going
to be able to say, OK, we
know what your bugs are,
which we can see now.
We know what they are.
And we know what we need
to do in this pathology.
But we don't have that yet.
And the microbiome is
different in different places
in your body.
And it's unique to everybody.
How do you study that?
But it is an area of
exciting research.
I've been to Boston
and LA this past year.
And the pharmaceuticals
are all there.
Because they know if we
can change the biome--
the brain-gut connection,
the brain-gut immune,
brain-gut-immune-hormone, you're
changing a lot of pathways.
Now, they want to be there
to find a strain, a something
that they can patent
and precision-- go in
and make a change.
Right?
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>WORDEN: But for the rest
of us, it's I think that we--
and that may be good
medicine at some point.
But what about the diversity?
The other thing that we
know is this-- interesting.
If you take an antibiotic,
one antibiotic,
your microbiome-- yours will be
back to normal in a few days.
If you take two
antibiotics, it's
going to take a lot longer.
And it may still look
a little different.
If you take three or more,
it doesn't go back to normal.
It doesn't go back.
It's changed forever.
And so as we learn
these things and we
learn to manipulate
the bugs in our body,
I say, right now, diversity.
Take different
probiotics, eat different
fermented foods,
diversity, diversity.
Get as much as we can.
>>REGINA: Now, what
about people who
have spent their lifetime
traveling where you've been
exposed to every kind of bug?
Is that normally beneficial?
Or do you pick up bugs?
>>WORDEN: Well, you'll pick up--
>>REGINA: Both.
>>WORDEN: --pathogens.
>>REGINA: Pathogens.
>>WORDEN: Right.
So you're going
to pick those up.
And that's where that
MicroGen test comes in.
I can find things that
before I couldn't find.
Or if we did find it,
they'd say, oh, here it is.
This person has Salmonella.
And so, OK, great.
Let's treat that.
But now, it's like, well,
they have Salmonella.
And they have E coli.
And they've got--
>>REGINA: Oh, my friend--
>>WORDEN: And they've
got they've a fungal--
>>REGINA: --Dengue fever.
>>WORDEN: Right.
All of these things.
Those we can--
>>REGINA: Trichinosis--
>>WORDEN: --see.
>>REGINA: --from their little
stall in the little street
fruit in Thailand.
>>WORDEN: It's looking
at the broad spectrum of.
And then you have to
decide how to treat it.
And it's interesting that this
new company-- they were only
in working with infectious
disease specialist
in the major hospitals.
And they came to
me and said, do you
think that we can start using
this in regular medicine?
I said yes, I want to start
utilizing this in cases
that I'm not getting better.
And I can't understand
why they're not.
There's something there
that I haven't found.
And when I told
them, I said, well,
this is one that may
have a biofilm around it.
So I'm going to
put them on enzymes
to break up that biofilm
so that the bug is not
protected from the treatments.
And they got ecstatic.
They go, oh, my gosh.
The doctor knows
what a biofilm is.
They were in the
background telling
all the other researchers.
They know these things, but
doctors sometimes don't.
>>REGINA: So Johns
Hopkins is actually
now mapping the microbiome
with a biome of tumors?
>>WORDEN: Mm-hmm.
So there's other
universities, too.
So we know a cancerous tumor--
>>REGINA: What's
that mean, though?
What's the potential to come
out of that besides more drugs?
>>WORDEN: Well, it has
its own microbiome.
It's its own thing going.
>>REGINA: And so why
are they doing this?
Why are they committing
that research--
>>WORDEN: Because--
>>REGINA: --for that?
>>WORDEN: --we know
that those tumors
can recruit immune cells.
And that immunotherapy-- when
we start understanding the tumor
microbiome, we may be able
to manipulate that as well.
And that means helping
to shrink or kill
that tumor with immunotherapy.
>>REGINA: OK, so--
>>WORDEN: That's why.
>>REGINA: --this is a good term.
>>WORDEN: It's a good thing.
>>REGINA: OK, now,
one other thing.
I read this.
Is there's something
called a viral biome
or looking at the viral load?
>>WORDEN: Well,
we have multiple--
so the microbiome includes
bacteria, viruses--
>>REGINA: Right.
Viruses.
>>WORDEN: --bugs.
It's the whole shebang.
>>REGINA: Is there a test
where you're just looking
at the viral load in the body?
>>WORDEN: Well,
those viruses are
what I'm looking at in
that microbiome test.
We're looking for viruses and
fungal and bacterias, right?
Can we see all of them?
Maybe, maybe not.
I think there are
viruses we have no idea.
We haven't even named them yet.
But the ones that we do know
that are pathological that
cause you to be sick--
we're pretty good at those.
>>REGINA: OK, so this
was encouraging to me.
I was reading an article
recently about an 8,000-person
study that had been
done of healthy people,
no seeming illness of any kind,
nothing certainly that had
manifested, so healthy people.
And among these healthy people,
they found that 42% of them
had in their blood--
HIV, herpes, hep C and
B, papilloma virus,
but they're
functioning just fine.
They'd been exposed to
these various things
to significant levels in
a large portion of them
to what was significant levels.
No problem.
The body--
>>WORDEN: Yet.
>>REGINA: --seems-- yet.
But I mean, truly,
isn't the body wired
to create its T cells and--
>>WORDEN: The immune--
>>REGINA: --to move through?
>>WORDEN: --system medicine.
It's miraculous.
It really is.
Some of these are overwhelming
to the immune system.
COVID is an example, right?
Some people's immune system
is able to take care of that.
You don't even
have any symptoms.
Other people's are more
significantly affected, even
to the point of death.
Right?
So as we study the immune
system more to understand it,
we'll have more information.
But the immune system
is our best medicine.
It is our best fighter.
It's smarter.
>>REGINA: I was
encouraged hearing that.
>>WORDEN: The best medicine.
You're saying the
dosage you need
and the right amount
without a side effect.
And that's why the
microbiome studies--
that's why it's going on.
We realized that when you
help the basic, innate immune
system, our own immune system--
be able to fight better.
That's the way it goes.
We all have all kinds of
things lurking around.
Our immune system
keeps it at bay.
But we know some of those
viruses in the long run
could cause a cancer.
When does it happen?
When the patient
is under stress.
They've had these
viruses for years
and functioned just fine, right?
But stress comes
along, which that
decreases the immune system.
Boom.
Now, we have cancer.
And most cancer
patients will tell you
that there was a stressful
event that happened
before this cancer showed up.
>>REGINA: And we
get back to what
we were talking about
earlier, this mind-body-spirit
connection.
>>WORDEN: That's exactly right.
>>REGINA: I mean, when they say
stress is the greatest killer,
I don't assume that to be a
bumper sticker or a slogan.
This is absolutely true.
Because once you start turning
into an acidic environment
upon feeling these
kinds of stress,
once the stress hormones
start kicking in,
once your cortisol
levels rise, you're
really now kicking off the
beginning of chronic disease
in your body.
>>WORDEN: So now, everybody
stresses about being stressed.
There are studies--
Dr. [INAUDIBLE] that
did studies on what
stressed cancer patients.
When you found out you
just had a diagnosis,
it was the self-help
books, the things
that you're supposed to be doing
and thinking and you're not.
It stressed them out even more.
You're going, I can't stress.
Or I'm going to get sick.
No, let's educate ourselves.
Let's empower ourselves.
And let's enlighten
ourselves to say,
we've got an amazing body here.
How can I support myself?
And what am I doing right now?
Eating the foods I shouldn't
be doing, not exercising, not
sleeping well.
What are the things
that I am doing and not
doing right now, that I can
change, that can help me,
because my body is amazing?
>>REGINA: Honor your spirit,
your emotion to your body.
>>WORDEN: All of it.
>>REGINA: That's the most
important thing we can--
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: --do for ourselves.
And I look at it in another
way, too, which is we all
have an expiration date, Right?
It's on the package somewhere.
And sometimes you
have a few options.
You can exit here
or maybe down here.
But the point is it's going
to happen to every one of us,
to be able to still see
the beauty in life--
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: --to engage with
it, to engage with each other
without feeling anxious
and worried and so forth--
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: --and take care
of this whole system.
>>WORDEN: Right.
Now is the time to take the
time to meditate, to exercise.
And it's about diversity.
Diversify your exercise,
do different things,
eat different foods,
different nutrients.
Different bad things, the
environmental toxins that are
there-- if you eat
the same food--
>>REGINA: Go organic.
>>WORDEN: --every time, you're
getting the same toxins.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>WORDEN: So now is the time--
>>REGINA: So--
>>WORDEN: --to
make those changes.
>>REGINA: --like
you say, diversify,
try to stay organic--
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: --as much
as you possibly--
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: --can.
Clean fluids, clean water.
You don't want a lot of
chlorine, and fluorine--
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: --and fluoride,
and so forth in your body.
>>WORDEN: And, Regina,
the medical system
is interested in this.
I just spoke for an
affiliate of Cedars-Sinai.
And it was a two-hour lecture.
And they'll have it
on their website.
But it was about the brain-gut
connection with the group.
So they're very interested.
They understand.
They know.
>>REGINA: They know
they have to go there.
>>WORDEN: They know,
but they're not
quite sure what to do about it.
But if we're talking about apps
and programs, look at Gaia.
Gaia is my go-to to
do my yoga every day.
I go and I find a new one
with a beautiful background.
I'm getting away
with Rodney Yee--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>REGINA: Ocean.
>>WORDEN: Ocean.
Yeah.
And it's a beautiful--
>>REGINA: It is.
>>WORDEN: A way.
So Gaia has many
programs that help people
with meditation and yoga.
We've got help there.
>>REGINA: Wonderful
source with tools.
Absolutely.
>>WORDEN: That's right.
We've got help that
doesn't cost a lot of money
that we could be doing
instead of saying--
waiting for a doctor or
the government to save us.
That's not going to happen.
>>REGINA: Right.
And even when you're talking
about these wonder-- and we're
just about out of time.
But I just want to
mention, even when
you're talking about
these universities
taking a great interest
in the microbiome
and so forth, you still
can't help but wonder,
but, yeah, what's in
it, a patent somewhere?
>>WORDEN: Sure.
>>REGINA: Another drug, profit.
So even so, I'm glad
there's mapping it.
It'd be nice if
they could map it
with the idea of healing people,
rather than making a profit,
though.
>>WORDEN: And I will
say a lot of researchers
do have that and doctors.
They go into it to heal
people, but then they
get caught in the system.
I need my grant money.
I need this.
I have to function.
I will lose my job
if I don't do this.
The system is broken.
And the researchers know it.
I have a research friend
that's supposed to--
for one of the major
publication journals, right?
Review research
that comes his way.
And he's a stickler.
So I asked him not too long ago.
I said, you've been doing this
now for about nine months.
How many have you
actually let through you?
Zero.
Because [LAUGHS].
And so we need to look at this.
And not all research is bad.
And not all pharmaceuticals
and drugs are bad.
But many of them, in my opinion,
do not have the research
that they need.
Or we could have gone a
natural route instead.
>>REGINA: OK, so Gaia videos--
>>WORDEN: Yes.
>>REGINA: --Gaia
yoga or whatever.
>>WORDEN: Yes.
>>REGINA: Pilates and so forth--
>>REGINA: --in the morning.
OK, good, healthy food.
Get out in the sun,
walk a little bit.
>>WORDEN: That's right.
>>REGINA: And if you
really get in trouble,
hopefully they have someone,
a nice naturopathic doctor
like you.
That's all I can say.
Thank you so much.
>>WORDEN: Or to not
get in trouble--
>>REGINA: Don't
get in trouble to--
>>WORDEN: --to start with.
>>REGINA: --begin with.
Absolutely.
>>WORDEN: Prevent.
That's right.
>>REGINA: You bet.
Thank you so much, Donese.
>>WORDEN: Thank you, Regina.
>>REGINA: Well, that's a lot
of information to contemplate.
If that wasn't
enough for you, you
can go to my previous
conversations
with Donese in
the Gaia archives.
You can also connect with
Donese via her website
at drworden.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]